# 12.1 Current and charge
---

### Electrical conduction
The vast magority of materials and substances (mediums) can be braudly classified as either **_insulators_**, **_conductors_** or **_semiconductors_**, dependent on their interaction with charge. Mediums are considered to be insulators if the passage of charge through them is difficult, but conductors, if the passage of charge is easy. Insulators present a **_high resistance_** to charge, and conductors, a **_low resistance_**. Numerous mediums comprise a third catagory - semiconductors, which vary in resistance due to temperature. Common materials and substances form each catagory are shown below.

|Insulators|Conductors|Semiconductors|
|----------|----------|--------------|
|Wood      |Silver    |Diamon        |
|Paper     |Copper    |Silicon       |
|Plastic   |Gold      |Gray tin      |
|Glass     |Aluminium |Germanium     |
|Wax       |Iron      |              |
|Rubber    |Nickel    |              |
|Wool      |Mercury   |              |

### Charge carriers
As discussed, conductive materials , charge is able to flow freely with little resistance. Yet, charge still requires a mechanism for transport - a **_charge carrier_**. In metalic conductors such as gold, many **_electrons_** are delocalised from atomic nuclei and said to be free; allowing charge to flow through the metal. When a voltage is applied between two terminals across the metal, the electrons flow unidirectionaly towards the posetive end. This flow of charge is called **_electric current_**. 
In comparison, within insulating materials, each electron is fixed to a parent atom, and unable to move easily. The electrons do not act as good charge carriers, resulting in greatly decreased current.
As for semiconductors, the effectiveness and number of charge carriers increases with temperature. When heated, many electrons may become delocalised and provide carriage of charge, resulting is less resistance and greater current.
Electrons are not the only form of charge carrier; salt solutions for instance, allow charge to flow by way of ions (charged atoms or molecules).

### Current in circuits
In many cases, contineuous current (flow of charge) is desired. In such cases one must create a circuit, composed of at least a conductive **_wire_** and a **_power suply_** - commonly at battery or cell. Power supplies force charge carriers through the conductive wire, causing a direct current. The wire must be connected to a posetive and negative terminal of the power supply at each end to allow for continueous current.

